Chris McCandless: Deluded Romantic or Transcendentalist Hero?

Upon reading Jon Krakauer’s journalistic narrative Into the Wild, many were swift to censure Krakauer for what they believed to be an overly romanticized depiction of the undeserving Chris McCandless and his journey in the wilderness, believing that he was little more than an ill-prepared, arrogant greenhorn. Fairbanks Daily News-Miner columnist Dermet Cole perhaps best summarises the views of these critics, writing “To sell the story, they’ve made it into a fable. He’s been glorified in death because he was unprepared” (qtd. in Power). When analysing the character of McCandless, it would be jejune to view him as either of the polar opposites of deluded versus heroic; rather, he is a complex character, a mix of Krakauer’s delineation with the reckless traits as indicated by critics. McCandless had many sophisticated  motives for going into the wild, many of which share Transcendentalist characteristics; however his journey was a product of overconfidence and slight arrogance, causing the tragic end of Alexander Supertramp.

McCandless’ motivation to enter the wilderness was complex: a mix of the urge to discover the meaning of life and true happiness, the seeking of freedom, and the appreciation of beauty. Early on, Krakauer writes that “Alaska has long been a magnet for dreamers and misfits, people who think the unsullied enormity of the Last Frontier will patch all the holes in their lives” (4). For McCandless, a gaping hole in his life was his upbringing: one which his sister Carine described as “toxic” (Johnson et al.), and one where his father “divid[ed] his time between two households” (Krakauer 121). McCandless reportedly told his sister it made his “entire childhood seem like a fiction” (qtd. in 122). It is consequently unsurprising that he highlights the line from Thoreau, “Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth”, writing “TRUTH” at the top of the page (117); and it is reasonable that the seek for “truth”, or the meaning of life, was a major motive behind McCandless’ journey. His desire to discover truth in life shares the Transcendentalist beliefs of Thoreau, shown when he takes particular note of an excerpt from Thoreau’s Walden, highlighting “The greatest gains and values are farthest from being appreciated… They are the highest reality” (qtd. in 48). In an interview with ABC News, Carine asserts that “their father was controlling and domineering” as well as violent towards Chris (Johnson et al.). Growing up in such an oppressive and violent household, there is no doubt Chris would be further attracted to the vast and free nature of the wilderness; this seek for freedom as a motive behind his adventurous and nomadic lifestyle is supported in one of Chris’ letters to Westerberg, writing “the freedom and simple beauty of [tramping] is just too good to pass up” (qtd. in Krakauer 34). McCandless also craved an adventurous lifestyle free from any constraints. In trying to persuade his friend under the pseudonym “Ron Franz”, McCandless convinces Ron that “once you become accustomed to [a helter-skelter style of life] you will see its full meaning and its incredible beauty” and that “the very basic core of a man’s living spirit is his passion for adventure” (qtd. in Krakauer 58). McCandless has indeed become accustomed to a nomadic lifestyle, and found beauty and passion in adventure. These aspirations of freedom, happiness and being one with nature are not much different from other such modern-day Transcendentalists, and one such outlier analogous to McCandless would be Everett Ruess. In a letter he writes to his brother, Waldow claims that:
I prefer the saddle to the streetcar and star-sprinkled sky to a roof, the obscure and difficult trail, leading into the unknown, to any paved highway, and the deep peace of the wild to the discontent bred by cities. (qtd. in Krakauer 87)
Ruess uses four consecutive comparisons, stressing his preference for nature in wanting “star-sprinkled sky” over a “roof”, the former being a cliché symbol for nature and the latter being man made. A “roof” is also constraining, whereas a “star-sprinkled sky” is endless, showing Ruess’ desire for freedom. In this sense, Ruess’ reasons for favouring “the deep peace of the wild” is similar to McCandless’. In both cases, this appreciation for nature, quest for freedom, and lust for the wild must not be hastily shunned as an overly idealistic, inordinately romanticized, deluded burst of energy—rather, at least in the case of McCandless and Ruess, this urge to enter the wilderness is cogent with specific, complex motives having Transcendentalist traits.
	
	Despite having apt reasons for yearning to be one with the wild, McCandless and other such outliers must not be held as heroes or role-models as their journeys are riddled with arrogance. Throughout the novel, Krakauer is extremely defensive of McCandless’ survival skills in the wilderness, even going so far as to developing multiple conjectures on how McCandless died of reasons other than his lack of ability to find adequate nutrition, all of which have been disproven by science; McCandless is still listed as having died of starvation (Krämer). As to the reason “McCandless [went] into the country with insufficient provisions, and he lacked certain pieces of equipment deemed essential by many Alaskans: a large-caliber rifle, map and compass, an ax” (Krakauer 179), Krakauer attempts to justify this as well, explaining “He was green, and he overestimated his resilience, but he was sufficiently skilled to last for sixteen weeks on little more than his wits and ten pounds of rice” (181). The point Krakauer misses here however, is that despite lasting for sixteen weeks on meager provisions, an admittedly difficult feat, McCandless still lost his life. Again, Krakauer tries to justify this by inserting two chapters of his own experiences which he likens to those of McCandless, at the end, writing:
I was stirred by the dark mystery of mortality. I couldn’t resist stealing up to the edge of doom and peering over the brink. The hint of was in those shadows terrified me, but I caught sight of something in the glimpse, some forbidden and elemental riddle… In my case—and, I believe, in the case of Chris McCandless—that was a very different thing from wanting to die. (154-55)
The “hint”, the “glimpse” of the “dark mystery of mortality”, or the meaning of life was what drew Krakauer, and probably also McCandless, in; not the idea of death. Krakauer argues McCandless did not want to die. However, Krakauer also claims that “[McCandless] knew precisely what was at stake” (181). In other words, McCandless knew his journey would likely cost him his life, and he was not suicidal; yet, he still entered the wild with a blatant disregard to safety, evident through the lack of tools McCandless brought for his adventure. The only explanation of this is he believed his skills and wits would allow him to make it out alive, when ultimately they were inadequate; put simply, he was arrogant. It is also conspicuous that he was arrogant instead of ignorant, when McCandless ignored Gallien’s advice, and did not budge when “Gallien thought the hitchhiker’s scheme was foolhardy and tried repeatedly to dissuade him” (5). When Gallien “tried to scare him with bear stories” (6), their exchange demonstrates his lack of knowledge of the Alaskan wilderness, specifically in bears:
I told him that a twenty-two probably wouldn’t do anything to a grizzly except make him mad. Alex didn’t seem too worried. ‘I’ll climb a tree’ is all he said. So I explained that trees don’t grow real big… But he wouldn’t give an inch. (qtd. in 6)
His obvious lack of concern when he “didn’t seem too worried” and the simple reply with an infeasible solution for the problem reflects how McCandless believes that they don’t pose a problem for him, and that his skills and knowledge are enough to help him survive. He puts this arrogant ideology best himself: “I’m absolutely positive… I won’t run into anything I can’t deal with on my own” (qtd. in 6). The disregard for an Alaskan’s advice and the power of nature should not be interpreted as confidence or an “adventurous spirit”; rather, it is overconfidence as it leads McCandless to his demise. This lack of respect for nature and one’s own life is also evident in Carl McCunn, a character with a journey analogous to McCandless’. Having the ability to call for help during an emergency is naturally a vital skill for surviving in the wilderness, and yet, he gave the incorrect hand signal for an overhead plane (82-83), a critical mistake easily avoidable through basic preparation. In both cases, it is a lack of preparation and an overconfident attitude that led to the end of McCandless’ and McCunn’s journeys. In this sense, they are not heroic; rather, somewhat deluded in their arrogance.

	Chris McCandless’ journey in Into the Wild was driven by complex, Transcendentalist-like motivations, and although his ardour for nature was rational, his journey was overly reckless and reflected his arrogance. The tragedy that is the fatal resolution of McCandless’ journey is especially ironic, as when he finally obtains the vast freedom of wilderness he has been looking for, he finally realises “happiness [is] only real when shared” (Krakauer 188), but it is too late—McCandless’ arrogance had already cost him his life, betraying his original intentions, just as appearance may betray reality.
